Adding page for proof-of-authority in consensus-mechanisms in the developers docs (#10800)
ethereum/ethereum-org-website: src/content/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/poa/index.md

---
title: Proof-of-authority (PoA)
description: An explanation of the proof-of-authority consensus protocol and its role in blockchain ecosystem.
lang: en
---

> proof-of-authority (PoA) the modified version of proof-of-stake and the most used consensus mechanism in testnet networks, it has several implementations with the most well known implementation clique.

Reviewer: (Capitalize start of sentence, ie "Proof-of-authority (PoA)...")

## Prerequisites {#prerequisites}

To better understand this page, we recommend you first read up on [transactions](/developers/docs/transactions/), [blocks](/developers/docs/blocks/), and [consensus mechanisms](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/).

## What is proof-of-authority (POA)? {#what-is-poa}

Proof-of-Authority is a modified version of [proof-of-stake](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pos/) that is a reputation-based consensus algorithm instead of stake-based mechanism in POS. The term has been introduced for the first time in 2017 by Gavin Wood, and this consensus algorithm has been mostly used by private chains, testnets and local development networks, as it overcomes the need for high quality resources as POW does, and overcomes the scalability issues with POS by having small subset of nodes storing the blockchian and producing blocks.

> The Proof-of-Authority simply requires to trust a subset of authorized signers that are set in the [genesis block](/glossary/#genesis-block), they have the same power in all situations as signers, no signer has exclusive privileges than others in the blockchain as you might think(unless new implementation follow this concept is introduced), the idea behind reputation staking is every authorized signer is well-known to everyone through things like KYC, or by having a well known org shouting they will be the only signer in their blockchain, this way if someone did something wrong, it can be detected who and what their identity is, i.e there will be no attacks on the consensus mechanism by anonymous signers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Proof-of-authority requires trusting a set of authorized signers that are set in the [genesis block](/glossary/#genesis-block). In most current implementations, all authorized signers retain equal power and privileges when determining consensus of the chain. The idea behind reputation staking is every authorized signer is well-known to everyone through things like know-your customer (KYC), or by having a well-known organization be the only signer. This way if a signer does anything wrong, their identity is known.
```

> The Proof-of-Authority has different implementations, but the ethereum standard implementation is clique that implements [eip-225](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-225), it has the most developer-friendly and easy to implement standard that all clients syncing types are supported, unlike a previously used implementation (Aura) that was implemented in openethereum, which fast,light syncing are not supported because smart contracts are used to store the authorized signers, clique instead only reuse obsoleted headers to solve the issues related to voting to add and remove signers.

Reviewer: (run-on sentence)

> The Proof-of-Authority

-> "Proof-of-authority"

> the ethereum standard implementation

-> "the standard Ethereum implementation"

> is clique that implements eip-225, ...

-> "is **clique**, which implements EIP-225. ..."

> it has the most developer-friendly and easy to implement standard that all clients syncing types are supported

-> "Clique is developer-friendly and an easy-to-implement standard, supporting all client syncing types."

Would cut the rest, since we seem to be getting into things that probably don't belong in the "What is PoA?" header... Would probably move any discussion about the details of implementations to either "How it works" below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Proof-of-authority has different implementations, but the standard Ethereum implementation is **clique**, which implements [EIP-225](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-225). Clique is developer-friendly and an easy-to-implement standard, supporting all client syncing types.
```

## how it works {#how-it-works}

> clique standard simply make a use of the obsolete headers: extradata that was used only for fun, miner became obsolete as there are no miners in POA, and nonce became also obsolete because the authorities the order of users transactions, extradata is used to store the authorized signers set, miner and nonce are used to vote for adding or removing signers from the network, where every epoch transition flushes all pending votes. The block proposal is selected sequentially for each block, but in fact any other authorized signer can propose block even if it's not his turn, but they have limit of signing only one block between K blocks when N are the authorized signers.

Reviewer: Think this needs a bit of a rework... As a user who lands on this page, new to the topic of PoA and in the "How it works" section, I would probably want to see this section introduced in a way that lays out the different important parts about how PoA works, and then explain them. This currently opens with a run-on statement that feels like we're in the middle of an explanation already.

Looks like we're covering:
1. how the block data is utilized (more technical, consider not leading with this one)
1. adding/removing signers from the network
1. proposing blocks

I would consider re-writing and potentially expanding on this a bit, using those three items as key points to cover. With enough info, we could turn these into three sub-headers, but it may just need an introduction statement and some hard-stops to break up the sentences. 

example intro sentence:
"When looking at how proof-of-authority works, there are some differences to other consensus mechanisms as to how blocks are structured, how blocks are proposed, who can propose them, and how to add or remove users from that list."
... Something like that where you could then go into details about these after framing the discussion.

## PROOF-OF-AUTHORITY AND SECURITY {#poa-security}

> ### Attack vector: Malicious signer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Malicious signers {#malicious-signers}
```

...Same below, see above

> It may happen that a malicious user gets added to the list of signers, or that a signer key/machine is compromised. In such a scenario the protocol needs to be able to defend itself against reorganizations and spamming. The proposed solution is that given a list of N authorized signers, any signer may only mint 1 block out of every K. This ensures that damage is limited, and the remainder of the miners can vote out the malicious user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It may happen that a malicious user gets added to the list of signers, or that a signing key/machine is compromised. In such a scenario the protocol needs to be able to defend itself against reorganizations and spamming. The proposed solution is that given a list of N authorized signers, any signer may only mint 1 block out of every K. This ensures that damage is limited, and the remainder of the miners can vote out the malicious user.
```

> ### Attack vector: Censoring signer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Censoring signers {#censoring-signers}
```

> Another interesting attack vector is if a signer (or group of signers) attempts to censor out blocks that vote on removing them from the authorization list. To work around this, we restrict the allowed minting frequency of signers to 1 out of N/2. This ensures that malicious signers need to control at least 51% of signing accounts, at which case it’s game over anyway.

Reviewer: > at which case it’s game over anyway.

May consider something less colloquial here and more translatable... maybe "at which point they would effectively become the new source-of-truth for the chain."

```suggestion
Another interesting attack vector is if a signer (or group of signers) attempts to censor blocks that vote on removing them from the authorization list. To work around this, the allowed minting frequency of signers is restricted to 1 out of N/2. This ensures that malicious signers need to control at least 51% of signing accounts, at which point they would effectively become the new source-of-truth for the chain.
```

> ### Attack vector: Spamming signer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Spamming signers {#spamming-signers}
```

> A final small attack vector is that of malicious signers injecting new vote proposals inside every block they mint. Since nodes need to tally up all votes to create the actual list of authorized signers, they need to track all votes through time. Without placing a limit on the vote window, this could grow slowly, yet unbounded. The solution is to place a ~~moving~~ window of W blocks after which votes are considered stale. ~~A sane window might be 1-2 epochs.~~ We’ll call this an epoch.

Reviewer: Double tildes will ~~strikeout the text~~ =)... Looks like you're going for italics here, in which case wrapping in single underscores will work _like this_.

> A final smal attack vector...

..Then we list another one below this.. wouldn't use "final" here

> A sane window might be 1-2 epochs. We'll call this an epoch.

? Was following, but "We'll call this an epoch" confused me... by "sane" window do you basically mean "reasonable"? Could we just trim that last sentence?

```suggestion
Another small attack vector is malicious signers injecting new vote proposals inside every block they mint. Since nodes need to tally up all votes to create the actual list of authorized signers, they need to track all votes through time. Without placing a limit on the vote window, this could grow slowly, yet unbounded. The solution is to place a _moving_ window of W blocks after which votes are considered stale. _A reasonable window might be 1-2 epochs._
```

> ### Attack vector: Concurrent blocks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Concurrent blocks {#concurrent-blocks}
```

> If the number of authorized signers are N, and we allow each signer to mint 1 block out of K, then at any point in time N-K+1 miners are allowed to mint. To avoid these racing for blocks, every signer would add a small random “offset” to the time it releases a new block. This ensures that small forks are rare, but occasionally still happen (as on the main net). If a signer is caught abusing it’s authority and causing chaos, it can be voted out.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand from reading this... Maybe we could use some example numbers here to clarify what is meant?

"at any point in time N-K+1 miners are..." Can you clarify what is meant here?

Also, a general note, I would consider removing the use of the word "miner" throughout this page unless specifically talking about proof-of-work, or a comparison to it... I would use "validator" instead, or be even more specific depending on the topic, such as "block proposer" or "attester" 

"the main net" -> "Mainnet"

"it's authority" -> "its authority"

> ## PROS AND CONS {#pros-and-cons}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Pros and cons {#pros-and-cons}
```

| Scalable more than other popular mechanisms such POS and POW, as it's based on a limited number of block signers                                          | PoA networks typically have a relatively small number of validating nodes. This makes a PoA network more centralized.                                 |
| PoA blockchains are incredibly cheap to run and maintain                                                                                                  | becoming an authorized signer is typically out of reach for an ordinary person, because the blockchain requires entities with established reputation. |
| The transactions are confirmed very quick as it could reach less than 1 second because only limited number of signers are required to validate new blocks | malicious signers could reorg,double spend,censor transactions in the network, those attacks are mitigated but still possible                         |

## Further Reading {#further-reading}

- [EIP-225](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-225) _Clique standard_

> - [proof of authority study](https://github.com/cryptoeconomics-study/website/blob/master/docs/sync/2.4-lecture.md) _Cryptoeconomics_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Proof of authority study](https://github.com/cryptoeconomics-study/website/blob/master/docs/sync/2.4-lecture.md) _Cryptoeconomics_
```

- [What is Proof of Authority](https://forum.openzeppelin.com/t/proof-of-authority/3577) _OpenZeppelin_
- [Proof of Authority Explained](https://academy.binance.com/en/articles/proof-of-authority-explained) _binance_
- [PoA in blockchain](https://medium.com/techskill-brew/proof-of-authority-or-poa-in-blockchain-part-11-blockchain-series-be15b3321cba)
- [Clique explained](https://medium.com/@Destiner/clique-cross-client-proof-of-authority-algorithm-for-ethereum-8b2a135201d)

> - [deprecated PoA, Aura specification](https://openethereum.github.io/Chain-specification)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Deprecated PoA, Aura specification](https://openethereum.github.io/Chain-specification)
```

- [IBFT 2.0, another PoA implementation](https://besu.hyperledger.org/stable/private-networks/concepts/poa)

> ### Videos {#videos}
> 
> - [Visual explanation of Proof of Authority](https://youtu.be/Mj10HSEM5_8)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## More of a visual learner? {#visual-learner}

Watch a visual explanation of proof-of-authority:

<YouTube id="Mj10HSEM5_8" />
```

Reviewer: This is a pattern we've established on a lot of other pages (this header, followed by embedding the YouTube video)... we typically will place this [above "Further reading" as well](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pos/pos-vs-pow/#visual-learner).
